<div class="single-article">

<div class="item-page clearfix">

## [Q4 2020 Progress Report](/297-q4-2020-progress-report.html)

<div style="text-align:center;">

</div>

<img src="/images/stories/frontend/progress_reports/q4-2020/q4-2020-report.jpg" width="563" height="104" alt="progress rep q4 2020" />

This quarter has been really amazing for us and for our users that enjoy
using PCSX2.

We've made some outstanding progress, hope you guys enjoy the read
<img src="https://pcsx2.net/images/stories/frontend/smilies/smile.gif" class="yvSmiley" width="20" height="20" alt="Smile" />

Written by
[lightningterror](https://forums.pcsx2.net/User-lightningterror)

# Core Improvements

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> Plugins merger
in to core continuation:**

As we mentioned in our previous report we are continuing merging the
plugins in to the core which bring us variety of benefits.

For people that used different plugins for specific features that aren't
available in the plugins we merged don't worry, we are working on adding
those features as well, be patient
<img src="https://pcsx2.net/images/stories/frontend/smilies/smile.gif" class="yvSmiley" width="20" height="20" alt="Smile" />

Currently the following plugins have been merged in to the core:

[\#3782](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3782) DEV9: For the DEV9
feature that handles PS2 hard disk drive and Ethernet emulation we
merged the dev9ghzdrk plugin in to the core. By
[GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

[\#3756](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3756) SPU2: For the SPU2
feature that handles PS2 audio we merged the SPU2-X plugin in to the
core. By [GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

[\#3889](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3889) USB: For the USB
feature we merged the USBqemu-wheel plugin in to the core. By
[GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

[\#3994](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3994) PAD: For the PAD
feature that handles PS2 controller input we merged LilyPad for Windows
users and OnePad 2.0 for Linux/Mac. In the future we will transition and
combine both of them so all missing features get added. By
[GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> Counters
improvements:**

[\#3785](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3785) Counters: Tighten
tolerances on framelimiter and smooth out frame pacing. By
[RedPanda4552](https://github.com/RedPanda4552) and
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Comparing PCSX2's old framelimiter with RTSS showed there was room for
improvement. Frametimes regularly would jump up and down in various
situations. This change smooths out frame pacing substantially across
the board (easily visible in RTSS). We have some comparisons below which
you can see the differences, alternatively our users can check out the
relative PR for more details.

Note: Master(Before) -&gt;PR(After)

Ratchet & Clank 2

<img src="/images/stories/frontend/progress_reports/q4-2020/r-c-2-frame-pacing.gif" width="816" height="66" />

Champions - Return to Arms

<img src="/images/stories/frontend/progress_reports/q4-2020/champions-return-to-arms-frame-pacing.gif" width="816" height="66" />

Metal Arms - Glitch in the System

<img src="/images/stories/frontend/progress_reports/q4-2020/metal-arms-frame-pacing.gif" width="816" height="92" />

[\#3862](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3862) Counters: account for
vertical frequency differences in non-interlaced analog modes. By
[tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) .

Timing adjustments for double strike analog modes.

Fixes Beatmania IIDX 3rd-8th Style.

[7117633](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/71176332042b004c2e05a517f481687d6fc39914)
Counters/Vsync: Do correct number of HBlanks per VSync for PAL/NTSC. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> MTVU
improvements:**

We are happy to announce that we have made great progress this time
around in improving MTVU compatibility with a bunch of games. The MTVU
list with remaining compatibility issues can be seen at
[\#1669](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/1669) .

[\#4035](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4035) MTVU: Improve
compatibility with games that do GS SIGNAL/LABEL/FINISH. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Improve compatibility with games that use FINISH/SIGNAL/LABEL on the GS
through VU1 when using MTVU.

Performance impact is reasonably minimal, within a couple of percent of
master. Although I cannot guarantee the reliability although it looks
good, it's a huge improvement and a vast majority of the games listed
are now playable with MTVU.

If a game does a double SIGNAL, that still won't work.

Fixed Games when using MTVU:

Backyard Basketball  
Baroque  
Batman: Vengeance  
Crash Nitro Kart  
Gradius V  
Heatseeker  
King's Field IV  
Marvel Ultimate Alliance  
Medal of Honor: Rising Sun  
MTVs Celebrity Deathmatch  
Summon Night Gran-These: Horobi no Ken to Yakusoku no Kishi  
Tony Hawk games  
X-Men Legends 2  
Yu-Gi-Oh! Capsule Monster Coliseum

Slowdown in games using MTVU Fixed:

007 Agent Under Fire  
007 Everything or Nothing  
TimeSplitters 2  
TimeSplitters Future Perfect

Homebrew Fixes:

Aura for Laura

[\#4043](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4043) VIF: Always update
MTVU thread with Row/Col Changes. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes graphical issues in Fatal Frame 2 when swapping to MTVU.

[\#4053](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4053) MTVU: Clean up GS
SIGNAL/LABEL/FINISH communication. By
[tellowkrinkle](https://github.com/tellowkrinkle) .

Fixes atomic usage and ensures all communication goes in one direction.

Also removed some forced 4-byte alignment, for 4-byte types it's
unnecessary and for 8-byte types it's either unnecessary or harmful.

[c9a5443](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/c9a5443539e5f2ec2a9719a39743fe9f36da551f)
VIF: Slightly optimise when Row/Col are written to MTVU. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[155cf38](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/155cf385bda43668ab3ebd7abf07940ed6047eef)
microVU: Flush running VU1 program when toggling MTVU on. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[7b7278b](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/7b7278bc85fa3becd39c47168fe6c912523b4d43)
VIF: Fix MPG bug incrementing addresses properly when using MTVU. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3813](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3813) COP2: Make sure the
status flag gets updated on DIV/SQRT/RSQRT. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .**

Fixes Yanya Caballista running slow (patches removed).  
Fixes Disney's Treasure Planet's crazy camera (that flies off) and
ground displacement.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3957](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3957) MFIFO: Maintain VIF
DMA status and Empty condition on VIF reset. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .**

Don't decrement/change VIF1 QWC on VIF1 FIFO write.

This involves removing an old VIF reset hack which was put in for Donald
Duck Quack Attack, but doesn't seem to be needed anymore (game uses
T-Bit on VU which has been fixed since this hack was placed in and could
likely have been the problem).

Fixes Scarface when switching to progressive mode.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> microVU
improvements:**

[0448b49](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/0448b4902c5e158af5bb654422d05eb78ceafa83)
microVU: Fixed bug in E-bit conditional branches. Fixes DT Racer. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[\#3865](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3865) microVU: Fix program
range wrapping. Fixes constant recompilation in IHRA Drag Racing and
Dawn of Mana. By [refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[\#3797](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3797) microVU: Make sure
flags are exact on M-bit. Fixes Gungrave. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[\#3971](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3971) microVU: Keep start
PC, modify prog search to avoid recompilation. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fix some M-Bit stuff to reduce programs created and fix them happening
on branches.

Hopefully shouldn't be much in the way of compatibility changes, but
should cut down the recompilation of MicroVU0 programs due to the change
in how VU0 operates and how things are going to work going forward. MGS3
went down from 115 (and climbing) to around 13. Crash Twinsanity went
down from 32 by the main menu to about 15.

This also sets up some future work of synchronising VU1.

Also fixes a bug in VIF when using MTVU, fixes Def Jam Fight for NY when
using MTVU, maybe others.

[03445d0](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/03445d0b553fc5a8275e5df91fe004a5e10607a2)
microVU: Add check when loading quick block from program. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Sometimes (CoD Finest Hour) can somehow end up with blocks missing from
a program, it still finds the current program, so we check if the block
exists, if not, recompile new ones.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> SIF
improvements:**

[\#3808](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3808) SIF: Fix attempting
to write junk when FIFO full. Fixes Ghosthunter. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[\#3779](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3779) SIF: Transfer SIF0
junk for partial QW transfers from IOP. Fixes True Crime: Streets of LA.
By [refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) , backport from
Dobiestation.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3955](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3955) DMA: Correctly
emulate QWC 0 on NORMAL transfers. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .**

This removes 2 hacks on the IPU for Enter the Matrix and Mana Khemia

On the PS2 if a NORMAL DMA transfer is started with QWC 0, the DMA
overflows and transfers another 0xFFFF quadwords on top of the
underflowed one, this correctly emulates that.

I did have to do a "kind of" hack to make Mana Khemia work properly, the
game relies on the IPU to take some time to decode macroblocks, but we
handle them instantly, so I had to place an artificial delay on starting
the DMA to let it catch up and do what it needs to do. It shouldn't have
any negative impacts.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3936](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3936) BIOS/HLE: Use BIOS
settings on Fastboot. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .**

Fixes bad fonts when booting a game in fast boot.

Selects correct language for games depending on your BIOS setting when
using fast boot.

It also makes normal boot works for your language even if you have a
difference between BIOS region and game region but you will need to go
into BIOS and apply that or let the default settings handle it based on
your BIOS. [\#4018](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4018) .

Stops games such as Guitar Hero 2 from crashing on fast boot.

Displays corrects timezones in games.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3969](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3969) IPU: Stop IPU0
looping when there's no data for it to read. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .**

Fixes bad slowdowns in Ratchet games when using EE Timing fix caused by
bad IPU streams.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> VIF
improvements:**

[678829a](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/678829a5b2b8ca7a3e42d8edc9ab201bf00b0fe9)
VIF: Don't rush finish VU programs. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes remaining SPS in Shadowman.

[\#4003](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4003) VIF: Don't start
transfer if VIF1/0 is stalled. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Also Fix missing VIF status check on MFIFO.

Fixes hang in Batman Vengeance, game stalls the VIF during an MFIFO
transfer then stops and starts VIF while it's stalled, in the old code
this causes it to ignore the stall and continue as normal, this PR fixes
that behaviour.

[a4553e8](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/a4553e821ffadf8a7c95e44a8ca7750d7f5df72f)
VIF: Allow VIF1 to continue if stalled and the FIFO is reversed. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[843650e](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/843650e79ecf02b2234728f5d9ab34767da4242b)
VIF: Mask VU program address on MSCAL/MSCNT instructions. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[97b74fa](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/97b74fa6ea81a1e213aa7bbdc8b5d7f5b2c27d83)
VIF: MSCNT address is -1, so don't mask it. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[2409486](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/2409486c2dc51346d6c04c4ff9297b9fce66d8b5)
VIF: Fixed undefined behaviour of Unpack V3-16 in final QW write. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes bad geometry in Homerun.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3998](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3998) VU: Synchronise VU1,
added speedhack for old behaviour. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .**

This synchronises VU1 with the EE and VU0 (as close as we can). A new
speedhack has been added to replicate the old behaviour, which is on by
default unless you're using the Safest preset. Games which require the
new behaviour have an entry in the GameDB to disable it.

Fixed Games:  
Fixes SPS in Shadowman 2encond Coming.  
Fixes "Noodles" in Parappa the Rapper 2 (box in the top left).  
Fixes floor corrupt textures and console error spam in Dropship.  
Slightly improves World series baseball 2k3 but it's still broken, just
doesn't run at sub 1fps anymore.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> SPU2
improvements:**

[\#3961](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3961) SPU2: Delay DMA Reads
to prevent overrun. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

[\#3959](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3959) SPU2: Get rid of the
need for delay cycles. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes the entire list of games that required alternative delay cycle
handling in [\#2371](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/2371) .

Fixes sound issues in Megaman X7.

*Note: This has been re implemented in Q1 with a better solution where
it doesn't cause issues.*

[\#3968](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3968) SPU2: Change
VolumeSteps from 42 to 5. By [RedDevilus](https://github.com/RedDevilus)
.

This will change the jumps from 42 to 5, scroll wheel will still be 2
and all the arrows keys on 1.

[3d3c039](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/3d3c0395965fc71ab57035d15b9a5430fae5dca7)
SPU2: Fix Address masks for voices + Effect area. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes reverb in The Suffering.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> USB
improvements:**

[\#4042](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4042) USB: Force Feedback
fixes. By [CookiePLMonster](https://github.com/CookiePLMonster) .

This PR partially addresses
<a href="https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/issues/3926" class="issue-link js-issue-link">#3926</a>
and corrects a range of issues with wheel's Force Feedback emulation.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> CDVD
improvements:**

[\#3877](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3877) CDVD: Adjust read
speed depending on if in inner/outer edge. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes Shadowman 2 Second Coming textures.  
Fixes Arctic Thunder loading problems.  
Fixes looping music on ONI title screen and skipping dialogues.  
Fixes Klonoa 2 missing audio.  
Fixes SPS at the beginning of matches in Next Generation Tennis 2003
(Ronald Garros).

[\#3899](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3899) CDVD: Check register
14 (ps1 status register) for cd speed and CDDA. By
[kenshen112(weirdbeardgame)](https://github.com/kenshen112) .

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> DEV9
improvements:**

[\#3740](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3740) DEV9: New TAP based
networking interface. By [GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

A new TAP based networking interface was added to DEV9, which is usually
a cleaner and simpler solution than the libpcap based one we used up
until now. This essentially mirrors the inner workings of all modern
VPNs.

[\#4021](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4021) DEV9: Cancel read of
TAP device on suspend/shutdown. By
[TheLastRar](https://github.com/TheLastRar) .

*Note: Wincap removal is not mentioned as it's re added in Q1 with some
modifications.*

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span>
[\#3928](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3928) GameDB: Replace
GameDB with a YAML equivalent. By [xTVaser (Tyler
Wilding)](https://github.com/xTVaser) .**

Improve the format of the current GameDB slightly and simplify the code
around the handling the file itself. Before it was an extended .ini file
format that relied on WX libraries.

Serve as a proof of concept for the YAML library / format that will be
coming soon with the larger configuration overhaul.

**<span style="color: #00ccff;"> \[Enhancement\] </span> Misc core
improvements:**

[\#3791](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3791) PGIF/PS1: Correct
PGIF Register bit masks. By [Nobbs66](https://github.com/Nobbs66) .

[\#3806](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3806) Gamefix: Purge FMV in
SW gamefix. By [tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) .

The gamefix/hack was broken and kind of pointless, it will be better to
properly fix the issues instead so we got rid of it.

[\#3844](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3844) CDVD: Fix iLinkId
issues, fixes timing issues with some BIOS revisions on Time Crisis 2
and 3. By [kozarovv](https://github.com/kozarovv) .

[0d1a583](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/0d1a5831449c4f31993ca4838dd1c39707e96cce)
DMA: Handle undefined Chain mode tags. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes DT Racer speed issues.

[\#3874](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3874) JIT: Fix FPU IEEE
float conversion on x64. By [GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

[\#3778](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3778) IOP DMA: Always fire
interrupts for SIF0/SIF1. By
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) and
[PSI-Rockin](https://github.com/psi-rockin) , backport from
Dobiestation.

Fixes Knockout Kings 2001 hang on boot. For more technical information
please see
[this](https://www.patreon.com/posts/sins-of-ps2-2001-42262496) post.

[\#3935](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3935) Core: Don't reopen
everything when we just want to reopen the CDVD. By
[TheLastRar](https://github.com/TheLastRar) .

[\#3743](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3743) Core: send osd log
event when snapshot is taken. By
[tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) .

[\#3604](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3604) PNACH: New patch
type: apply repeating codes also on load. By
[GovanifY](https://github.com/GovanifY) .

[\#3651](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3651) x86emitter: Register
class improvements. By [tellowkrinkle](https://github.com/tellowkrinkle)
.

[\#4023](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4023) GS: Properly mirror
GS reads to CSR. By [tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) and
[refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Puts in the correct behaviour for GS reads.

Fixes Supadoopa's Funslower demo.

[c998a51](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/c998a51f71f6a81a2f4f0c9d27c85714d74ccd57)
IOP DMA: Only acknowledge SPU2 DMA interrupt if DMA hasn't been
cancelled. By [refractionpcsx2](https://github.com/refractionpcsx2) .

Fixes Gregory Horror Show bad audio.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# TAS (Tool Assisted Speedrun) Utility Improvements

[\#3627](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3627) Recording: Add menu
items for recording controls with keyboard shortcuts. By [xTVaser(Tyler
Wilding)](https://github.com/xTVaser) and
[sonicfind](https://github.com/sonicfind) .

[\#3356](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3356) Recording: Overhaul
of Recording Tool's VirtualPad. By [xTVaser(Tyler
Wilding)](https://github.com/xTVaser) .

[\#4047](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4047) Recording: Properly
cancel an input recording on a bad initial savestate. By
[sonicfind](https://github.com/sonicfind) .

[\#3789](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3789) Recording: Resolve
VirtualPads not drawing for some games. By
[sonicfind](https://github.com/sonicfind) .

[\#3845](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3845) GUI: Internalize
VirtualPad and Upgrade NewRecordingFrame. By
[sonicfind](https://github.com/sonicfind) .

Simplifies virtualPad access. This will be useful later down the line
when more virtualPads are added.

NewRecordingFrame has improved functionality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# GSdx Improvements

[\#3858](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3858) GSdx: Properly init
gsclut function ptrs. By [tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) .

GS reads lower 3 bits of PSM to determine if format is 8/4 bit and thus
whether to write the clut into the clut buffer. Behavior is now
correctly emulated.

Fixes international superstar soccer.

[\#3873](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3873) GSdx-hw: Cleanup
blending code a bit. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

[\#3765](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3765) Gsdx-hw: Move
EmulateAtst in common hw renderer code. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

Use shared code, instead of duplicates for each renderer.

[\#3905](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3905) GSdx: Remove TV
Shader hotkey toggle (F7). By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

Plenty of users misclicked this setting and don't know how to switch
back since it's a rarely used option. We got rid of the hotkey toggle
for a quality of life change.

[\#3891](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3891) GSdx-hw: Don't always
set MaxDepth on ps/fs. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

Seems that it provides a very small fps increase.

[\#3880](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3880) GSdx: Change DATE
accuracy option from a list to a checkbox. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

For OpenGL it will behave as previously if Full option was selected
(more accurate).

For Direct3D10/11 it will behave as previously if Basic option was
selected (less accurate).

[\#3927](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3927) GSdx-ogl: Fix
anisotropic filtering on OpenGL. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

Anisotropic filtering was broken on OpenGL ever since Trilinear
filtering was introduced (1.3.1 era), hopefully nobody noticed and we
fixed the issue
<img src="https://pcsx2.net/images/stories/frontend/smilies/smile.gif" class="yvSmiley" width="20" height="20" alt="Smile" />

Note that it won't work properly on AMD due to broken driver, issue has
been reported and they are working on a fix.

[\#3714](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3714) GSdx-ogl: Check
MinMax for PSConstantBuffer. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

Fixes Silent Hill 3 character textures.

[\#3985](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3985) GSdx: Remove some
broken buffer width correction code. By
[tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) .

Removes some code that was meant to correct a condition on the GS where
8-bit and 4-bit formats are assigned a buffer width that is not
divisible by 2. Given that the code just forced it to be even (almost
certainly not correct) and was some kind of workaround dating back 13
years I'm opting to remove it. If someone can give me an example of a
game that is broken without this code I'll look into it again but it
seems like a fairly rare condition.

Fixes graphical issues in Galaxy Angel.

List of removed CRC hacks:

[\#3908](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3908) Star Wars - Force
Unleashed. Hack replaced by a gamedb patch since it's not a GSdx issue.
By [kozarovv](https://github.com/kozarovv) .

[56893a0](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/56893a07312183a525b5c6f7e1576bb4e3c6a1e4)
Removed/merged duplicate hacks for Radiata Stories, Star Ocean 3, and
Valkyrie Profile 2. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

[d0dd60f](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/d0dd60f295075a9f8ea98ef539430d0b6031e290)
Bleach Blade Battlers. Hack no longer needed, effects rendered properly.
By [lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

[d5adcdd](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/d5adcdd1b217c4537e50f673a70b3eb5d38c991d)
God of War 2. Hack partially removed because upscaling issues can not be
resolved with upscaling hacks. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

[85c3ee8](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/commit/85c3ee823fa9d111e2039d6664bc5d63dc21672f)
Sly 2 and 3. Hacks removed, effects emulated properly, upscaling issues
can be resolved with upscaling hacks. By
[lightningterror](https://github.com/lightningterror) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Misc Improvements

[\#3531](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3531) GUI: Add "Screenshot
As..." feature to Capture options. By [xTVaser (Tyler
Wilding)](https://github.com/xTVaser) .

[\#4007](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4007) GUI: Fixes speedhacks
panel from shrinking when moving the slider, most noticeable when using
DPI scaling. By [tadanokojin](https://github.com/tadanokojin) .

[\#3633](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/3633) Misc: More Mac
build/fixes. By [tellowkrinkle](https://github.com/tellowkrinkle) .

[\#4044](https://github.com/PCSX2/pcsx2/pull/4044) PAD-Windows: Remove
obsolete code related to the output window. By
[MrCK1](https://github.com/MrCK1) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

And that's all from us, see you next time in our 2021 Q1 Report!

</div>

</div>
